# _Final Paper_

## *Abstract* 
> This project serves the purpose to explore the relationships between the various factors asked within the National Youth Physical Activity and Nutrition Study (NYPANS). As Childhood Obesity is becoming a more prominent health issue because more and more children are being diagnosed with diabetes, hypertension and other co-morbid conditions associated with obesity and morbid obesity, our hope is to provide both policy makers more information about the factors that could potentially be at play in promoting such disease. Among our findings between physical activity level, sports type and participation level, nutritional intake, and the psyche of how teens felt after completing a certain number of minutes of physical activity, we also found that in general, many teens are participating in healthy activities but at a much lower rate of intake. Most other studies present such findings with direct correlations to an adolescent's health, however this research study aims to seek more than the faux paus that correlation equals causation and provide more insights into information and visualizations presented to allow readers to make their own decisions by using the representative, categorical data.

## *Introduction*
> The purpose of of our project was to look at how the combination of exercise and nutrition affected teenagers on a nationwide scale. As in current times, there are teenagers that eat healthy but do not get as much exercise as recommended by the CDC and other government health organizations. Knowing this altruistic pattern of behavior, we thought it would be interesting to see which categorical factors are contributing to nutritional determinants for the surveyed group. This examination into such data is especially important to what's occurring now, as childhood obesity in America is becoming a growing nationwide problem. According to the CDC, "Data from 2015-2016 show that nearly 1 in 5 school age children and young people (6 to 19 years) in the United States has obesity." We created an interactive Shiny Web application to showcase our findings for this study to give the users the freedom to explore the we analyzed information on their own, allowing them to use their unique perspectives to think of underlying factors between the categories contrasted regarding the topic with the guidance of our tool. We hope this tool helps answer relevant questions and provide insight regarding the combination of  teenagers' exercise and nutrition levels to those in the Department of Education who oversee policy implementation Office of Superintendent of Public Instruction's Food and Nutrition Services.

## *Related Work*
> In recent decades, more interest has been taken to child health as a growing amount of millennials are becoming more and more immersed in the such a tech-centric era. Thus, there are many research studies and scholarly articles outlining the current health status of the youth of America. Through the study **Obesity and other correlates of physical activity and sedentary behaviors among US high school students**, researchers from the Division of Adolescent and School Health, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention focused on analyzing the combined variables of associations of physical activity (PA) correlates between "obesity, physical education classes, sports team participation, attitude toward PA, adult support for PA, and environmental support for PA) and participation in daily PA (DPA), vigorous PA (VPA), muscle-strengthening activity (MSA), viewing television (TV), and using computers or video games (C/VG)" [source](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23606950). Their findings were heavily focused on how a positive attitude toward physical activity and adult support for  physical activity were both associated with increased  physical activity and decreased sedentary behavior. However, among students who lived in neighborhoods that were not safe for  physical activity, a positive attitude toward  physical activity was not associated with increased daily  physical activity or decreased sedentary behavior and was less strongly associated with vigorous physical activity and muscle-strengthening activity. 

> Another study, **Behaviors related to physical activity and nutrition among U.S. high school students** was done by researchers from the Division of Adolescent and School Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta, Georgia [source](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23796969) . While it does not necessarily evaluate the data by any other standard of data wrangling, the report on it mostly serves to highlight the race related data points as it states, "during the 7 days before the survey, 74.8% of students ate at least one meal or snack from a fast food restaurant, with black students more likely than white and Hispanic students to have done so." This is helpful and informative when presenting information that is very relevant to subgroups and minority centric policy makers and other higher officials can very well make use of such statistics to improve current reforms in the education system to accommodate for such disparities.This allowed readers to better understand and be aware of how NYPANS data can be used to develop obesity prevention programs that address specific behaviors and behavioral correlates, and target subgroups in which behaviors and behavioral correlates related to obesity are most prevalent.

## *Methods*
> Our dataset was the National Youth Physical Activity and Nutrition Study (NYPANS) which was conducted in 2010. Our group employed the packages Plotly and Ggplot2 to best create visuals based on our survey using Rstudio. We also used Dplyr to filter our dataset to only focus on certain aspects/variables of the categorical data presented in the NYPAN Survey. One aspect of our visualization compared _how often people exercised for more than 60 minutes_ and _how they felt about exercise_. Another visualization centered around the question of how PE classes _affects the nutrition of participants_. Because the original questionnaire was composed of individual, weighted, categorical questions, the questions we asked were focused on two very specific highlights of the dataset to have the most impact possible of the data available. When selecting the specific variables to analyze, we grouped questions by similarity which may have fallen into similar categories when presented in the questionnaire. For example, if the survey asked about drink consumption in such areas as milk, water, 100% fruit juice, and coffee/tea, it would be overall grouped into a "healthy" category when compared to the other options which were inherently unhealthy in comparison and consumption level. This was to represent as much of the dataset as possible, and also to simplify data presented to readers with more room for their own thoughts and interpretations out of the data set.

## *Results*
> The major insights resulting from our research stemmed from our visualizations themselves and the ability of combining otherwise unlike traits of nutrition. For physical activity levels, we see a very different trend from the amount of time expended per activity and overall feeling towards such. Number of respondents for both groups decrease as activity level is increased as well as number of days teenagers participated in exercise, as represented on the y-axis of the first comparative visualization. This was mainly used to see if the bell curves on the bar plots change based on number of days they exercise, which it did. Furthermore, for the focus of how PE classes affects the nutrition of participants, the visualization showed that there was less of a connection between the survey questions and that those who were taking a physical education course at their school were more likely to eat healthier options (daily recommended serving of 1 cup of fruit and vegetables) than those who were not or did not have availability of such a class at their high school.

## *Discussion*
> In terms of implications of our comparative analysis, we can infer that from the first focus on how often people exercised for more than 60 minutes and how they felt about exercise was at a constant decrease, it could be telling of how possibly seeing number of people exercising go down in this day in age compared to 2010 because of the more ubiquitous technology use. In addition, efforts to increase physical activity among youth should promote a positive attitude toward physical activity and encourage adult family members to support their efforts to be active. Policies that promote safe neighborhoods may work synergistically with a positive attitude toward physical activity to increase participation and can allow for a decrease sedentary behaviors. Our work was important because most would tend to segment these categories individually and do not enhance a reader's perception by bringing this information together. By only focusing on the consumption levels from this survey, it does not correlate well with entirely being "healthy" as we've learned throughout our Population Health Metrics course; there are so many other factors involved outside of nutrition and physical activity and although our results do no paint an entire picture of , it still shows there is much more room for improvement in not only our data work, but also those surveying such an impressionable population. 

> Some difficulties we encountered in our study were that we found ourselves dealing with numerical data being categorical and so the possible calculations to do on such a set were sort of narrow and limited. In addition, getting the Shiny Web Application to properly publish and display the results we were looking for was cumbersome and many attempts were in vain of trying to push in other variables to add to our findings. Lastly, the column names of the dataset itself did not give any insight to what they meant, so we had to constantly look at the data user's manual documentation for clarification, guidance, and support. Moreover, in terms of the successes of this project, we found that we chose a very interesting dataset where we could ask many questions of what was being presented from a Health Metrics standpoint. We also found ourselves asking the right, overarching questions of a dataset from 2010 that are still relevant to today's current hot topic issues such as childhood obesity and nutrition levels in connection to those who may lack the resources to participate properly in physical activity during adolescence.

## *Future Work*
> Our system could be extended by looking further into the implications of national youth health from a historical and futuristic perspective. Comparing the current NYPANS data we handled to those of other times since the mid 20th century would make it much easier to see the changes occurring over time of youth nutrition and physical activity, and would potentially make a shift in an underlying variable more obvious which could also allow the correlation of those values occurring in conjunction with some specific health issue happening at the time, with our current one for the past few decades being childhood obesity. Furthermore, finding more implications to our overall work would be more beneficial to those who would have been accessing our work professionally. Lacking the ability to produce a third, overarching visualization - due to our group's own constraints - left our work a little lackluster in terms of our findings that could be directly affecting the current teen population. However, what we did find is still significant to the overall scheme of showing the growing problem of a minority which are the unhealthy youth population.